RBI/2007-2008/296
DBOD.No.Leg.BC.75 /09.07.005/2007-08
                                                                                        April 24, 2008

All Scheduled Commercial Banks
(Excluding RRBs)

Dear Sir,

Mid-Term Review of the Annual Policy for the year 2007- 08 –
Recovery Agents engaged by banks

Please refer to the paragraph 172 and 173 of the mid-term review of the Annual Policy for the year
2007-08, a copy of which is enclosed. In view of the rise in the number of disputes and litigations
against banks for engaging recovery agents in the recent past, it is felt that the adverse publicity
would result in serious reputational risk for the banking sector as a whole. A need has therefore
arisen to review the policy, practice, and procedure involved in the engagement of recovery agents
by banks in India. In this backdrop, Reserve Bank issued draft guidelines which were placed on the
web-site for comments of all concerned. Based on the feedback received from a wide spectrum of
banks / individuals / organizations, the draft guidelines have been suitably revised and the final
guidelines are as follows:

Engagement of Recovery Agents
2. Banks are advised to take into account the following specific considerations while engaging
recovery agents:

(i) ‘Agent’ in these guidelines would include agencies engaged by the bank and the agents/
employees of the concerned agencies.

(ii) Banks should have a due diligence process in place for engagement of recovery agents, which
should be so structured to cover, among others, individuals involved in the recovery process. The
due diligence process should generally conform to the guidelines issued by RBI on outsourcing of
financial services vide circular DBOD.No.BP.40/ 21.04.158/ 2006-07 dated November 3, 2006.
Further, banks should ensure that the agents engaged by them in the recovery process carry out
verification of the antecedents of their employees, which may include pre-employment police
verification, as a matter of abundant caution. Banks may decide the periodicity at which re-
verification of antecedents should be resorted to.

(iii) To ensure due notice and appropriate authorization, banks should inform the borrower the
details of recovery agency firms / companies while forwarding default cases to the recovery agency.
Further, since in some of the cases, the borrower might not have received the details about the
recovery agency due to refusal / non-availability / avoidance and to ensure identification, it would be
appropriate if the agent also carries a copy of the notice and the authorization letter from the bank
along with the identity card issued to him by the bank or the agency firm / company. Further, where
the recovery agency is changed by the bank during the recovery process, in addition to the bank
notifying the borrower of the change, the new agent should carry the notice and the authorization
letter along with his identity card.

(iv) The notice and the authorization letter should, among other details, also include the telephone
numbers of the relevant recovery agency. Banks should ensure that there is a tape recording of the
content / text of the calls made by recovery agents to the customers, and vice-versa. Banks may
take reasonable precaution such as intimating the customer that the conversation is being
recorded, etc.

(v) The up to date details of the recovery agency firms / companies engaged by banks may also be
posted on the bank’s website.
(vi) Where a grievance/ complaint has been lodged, banks should not forward cases to recovery
agencies till they have finally disposed of any grievance / complaint lodged by the concerned
borrower. However, where the bank is convinced, with appropriate proof, that the borrower is
continuously making frivolous / vexatious complaints, it may continue with the recovery proceedings
through the Recovery Agents even if a grievance / complaint is pending with them. In cases where
the subject matter of the borrower’s dues might be sub judice, banks should exercise utmost
caution, as appropriate, in referring the matter to the recovery agencies, depending on the
circumstances.

(vii) Each bank should have a mechanism whereby the borrowers' grievances with regard to the
recovery process can be addressed. The details of the mechanism should also be furnished to the
borrower while advising the details of the recovery agency as at item (iii) above.

Incentives to Recovery Agents
(viii) It is understood that some banks set very stiff recovery targets or offer high incentives to
recovery agents. These have, in turn, induced the recovery agents to use intimidatory and
questionable methods for recovery of dues. Banks are, therefore, advised to ensure that the
contracts with the recovery agents do not induce adoption of uncivilized, unlawful and questionable
behaviour or recovery process.

Methods followed by Recovery Agents
(ix) A reference is invited to (a) Circular DBOD.Leg.No.BC.104/ 09.07.007 /2002-03 dated May 5,
2003 regarding Guidelines on Fair Practices Code for Lenders (b) Circular DBOD.No.BP. 40/
21.04.158/ 2006-07 dated November 3, 2006 regarding outsourcing of financial services and (c)
Master Circular DBOD.FSD.BC.17/ 24.01.011/2007-08 dated July 2, 2007 on Credit Card
Operations. Further, a reference is also invited to paragraph 6 of the "Code of Bank's Commitment
to Customers" (BCSBI Code) pertaining to collection of dues. Banks are advised to strictly adhere
to the guidelines / code mentioned above during the loan recovery process.

Training for Recovery Agents
(x) In terms of Para 5.7.1 of our Circular DBOD.NO.BP. 40/ 21.04.158/ 2006-07 dated November 3,
2006 on guidelines on managing risks and code of conduct in outsourcing of financial services by
banks, banks were advised that they should ensure that, among others, the recovery agents are
properly trained to handle with care and sensitivity, their responsibilities, in particular aspects like
hours of calling, privacy of customer information etc.

(xi) Reserve Bank has requested the Indian Banks’ Association to formulate, in consultation with
Indian Institute of Banking and Finance (IIBF), a certificate course for Direct Recovery Agents with
minimum 100 hours of training. Once the above course is introduced by IIBF, banks should ensure
that over a period of one year all their Recovery Agents undergo the above training and obtain the
certificate from the above institute. Further, the service providers engaged by banks should also
employ only such personnel who have undergone the above training and obtained the certificate
from the IIBF. Keeping in view the fact that a large number of agents throughout the country may
have to be trained, other institutes/ bank’s own training colleges may provide the training to the
recovery agents by having a tie-up arrangement with Indian Institute of Banking and Finance so
that there is uniformity in the standards of training. However, every agent will have to pass the
examination conducted by IIBF all over India.

Taking possession of property mortgaged / hypothecated to banks
(xii) In a recent case which came up before the Honourable Supreme Court, the Honourable Court
observed that we are governed by rule of law in the country and the recovery of loans or seizure of
vehicles could be done only through legal means. In this connection it may be mentioned that the
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act,
2002 (SARFAESI Act) and the Security Interest (Enforcement) Rules, 2002 framed thereunder
have laid down well defined procedures not only for enforcing security interest but also for
auctioning the movable and immovable property after enforcing the security interest. It is, therefore,
desirable that banks rely only on legal remedies available under the relevant statutes while
enforcing security interest without intervention of the Courts.
(xiii) Where banks have incorporated a re-possession clause in the contract with the borrower and
rely on such re-possession clause for enforcing their rights, they should ensure that the re-
possession clause is legally valid, complies with the provisions of the Indian Contract Act in letter
and spirit, and ensure that such repossession clause is clearly brought to the notice of the borrower
at the time of execution of the contract. The terms and conditions of the contract should be strictly
in terms of the Recovery Policy and should contain provisions regarding (a) notice period before
taking possession (b) circumstances under which the notice period can be waived (c) the procedure
for taking possession of the security (d) a provision regarding final chance to be given to the
borrower for repayment of loan before the sale / auction of the property (e) the procedure for giving
repossession to the borrower and (f) the procedure for sale / auction of the property.

Use of forum of Lok Adalats
(xiv) The Honourable Supreme Court also observed that loans, personal loans, credit card loans
and housing loans with less than Rs.10 lakh can be referred to Lok Adalats. In this connection,
banks' attention is invited to Circular DBOD.No.Leg.BC.21/09.06.002/2004-05 dated August 3,
2004 wherein they were advised to use the forum of Lok Adalats organized by Civil Courts for
recovery of loans. Banks are encouraged to use the forum of Lok Adalats for recovery of personal
loans, credit card loans or housing loans with less than Rs.10 lakh as suggested by the Honourable
Supreme Court.

Utilisation of credit counsellors
(xv) Banks are encouraged to have in place an appropriate mechanism to utilise the services of the
credit counsellors for providing suitable counselling to the borrowers where it becomes aware that
the case of a particular borrower deserves sympathetic consideration.

Complaints against the bank / its recovery agents
3. Banks, as principals, are responsible for the actions of their agents. Hence, they should ensure
that their agents engaged for recovery of their dues should strictly adhere to the above guidelines
and instructions, including the BCSBI Code, while engaged in the process of recovery of dues.

4. Complaints received by Reserve Bank regarding violation of the above guidelines and adoption
of abusive practices followed by banks’ recovery agents would be viewed seriously. Reserve Bank
may consider imposing a ban on a bank from engaging recovery agents in a particular area, either
jurisdictional or functional, for a limited period. In case of persistent breach of above guidelines,
Reserve Bank may consider extending the period of ban or the area of ban. Similar supervisory
action could be attracted when the High Courts or the Supreme Court pass strictures or impose
penalties against any bank or its Directors/ Officers/ agents with regard to policy, practice and
procedure related to the recovery process.

5. It is expected that banks would, in the normal course ensure that their employees also adhere to
the above guidelines during the loan recovery process.

Periodical Review
6. Banks engaging recovery agents are advised to undertake a periodical review of the mechanism
to learn from experience, to effect improvements, and to bring to the notice of the Reserve Bank of
India suggestions for improvement in the guidelines.

                                                                                     Yours faithfully

                                                                                 (Prashant Saran)
                                                                  Chief General Manager-in-Charge
                      Extracts of Paragraphs 172 and 173 of the Mid-term
                       review of the Annual Policy for the year 2007-08

Recovery Agents Engaged by Banks

172. In view of the rise in the number of litigations against banks for engaging recovery agents in
the recent past, it is felt that the adverse publicity could result in serious reputational risk for the
banking sector as a whole. An urgent need has, therefore, arisen to review the policy, practice,
procedure involved in the engagement of recovery agents by banks in India. Accordingly, banks are
urged to follow prescribed specific considerations while engaging recovery agents.


173. Complaints received by the Reserve Bank regarding abusive practices followed by a bank’s
recovery agents would invite serious supervisory disapproval. The Reserve Bank would consider
imposing a temporary ban (or even a permanent ban in case of persistent abusive practices) for
engaging recovery agents on those banks where strictures have been passed/ penalties have been
imposed by a High Court/Supreme Court or against its Directors/Officers with regard to the abusive
practices followed by their recovery agents. An operational circular in this regard would be issued
by November 15, 2007.
