RBI/2006/167
DBOD.NO.BP. 40/ 21.04.158/ 2006-07
                                                                              November 3, 2006

All Scheduled Commercial Banks(excluding RRBs)

Dear Sir,

Guidelines on Managing Risks and Code of Conduct in Outsourcing of Financial
Services by banks
In view of the extensive use of outsourcing by banks, Reserve Bank had issued draft guidelines
on 6th December 2005 for laying down a framework for managing the attendant risks in
outsourcing. On the basis of the suggestions received from all concerned, the draft guidelines
have been suitably modified.

2. It may be noted that it is entirely for the banks to take a view on the desirability of
outsourcing a permissible activity related to financial services having regard to all relevant
factors, including the commercial aspects of the decision, However, should a bank, in its own
judgment, decide to outsource a financial services activity, necessary safeguards for
addressing the risks inherent in such outsourcing should be put in place, as detailed in these
guidelines. The final guidelines on managing risks in outsourcing as applicable to banks are
furnished in the Annex.

3. These guidelines are concerned with managing risks in outsourcing of financial services and
are not applicable to technology-related issues and activities not related to banking services
like usage of courier, catering of staff, housekeeping and janitorial services, security of the
premises, movement and archiving of records etc.

4. Audit-related assignments to Chartered Accountant firms will continue to be governed by the
instructions/ policy as laid down by the Department of Banking Supervision.

5. Banks' attention is drawn to para 5.5.1 of the Annex in terms of which the outsourcing
agreements should include enabling clauses to allow Reserve Bank or the persons authorized
by it to access the relevant information/ records with the service provider relating to outsourced
activities within a reasonable time.
Yours faithfully,



(Prashant Saran)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge
                                                                                           Annex

1 Introduction
1.1 The world over, banks are increasingly using outsourcing as a means of both reducing cost
and accessing specialist expertise, not available internally and achieving strategic aims.
'Outsourcing' may be defined as a bank's use of a third party (either an affiliated entity within a
corporate group or an entity that is external to the corporate group) to perform activities on a
continuing basis that would normally be undertaken by the bank itself, now or in the future.
' Continuing basis' would include agreements for a limited period.

In keeping with this international trend, it is observed, that banks in India too have been
extensively outsourcing various activities. Needles to say, such outsourcing, results in banks
being exposed to various risks as detailed in para 1.3. Further, the outsourcing activities are to
be brought within regulatory purview and the interests of the customers have to be protected.

It is against this background, that Reserve Bank of India has deemed it appropriate to put in
place a set of guidelines to address, the risks that bank would be exposed to in a milieu of
growing outsourcing activity and to ensure that the bank concerned and the Reserve Bank of
India have access to all books, records and information available with service provider. The
guidelines also cover issues relating to safeguarding of customer interests.

Typically outsourced financial services include applications processing (loan origination, credit
card), document processing, marketing and research, supervision of loans, data processing
and back office related activities etc.

1.2 The Joint Forum, a tripartite body comprising Basel Committee on Banking Supervision,
International Organization of Securities Commission and International Association of Insurance
Supervisors had issued guidelines on outsourcing in financial services in February 2005. The
Joint Forum has developed a set of Guiding Principles. These Guiding Principles have been
suitably incorporated in the guidelines now being issued by RBI. Internationally, several
countries have also put in place, guidelines on outsourcing in financial services. These include
USA, UK, Germany, Hong Kong, Australia and Singapore. The guidelines of RBI are based on
international best practices.

1.3 Outsourcing brings in its wake, several risks. Some key risks in outsourcing may be
Strategic Risk, Reputation Risk, Compliance Risk, Operational Risk, Legal Risk, Exit Strategy
Risk, Counter party Risk, Country Risk, Contractual Risk, Access Risk, Concentration and
Systemic Risk. The failure of a service provider in providing a specified service, a breach in
security/ confidentiality, or non-compliance with legal and regulatory requirements by either the
service provider or the outsourcing bank can lead to financial losses or loss of reputation for the
bank and could also lead to systemic risks within the entire banking system in the country. It
would therefore be imperative for the bank outsourcing its activities to ensure effective
management of these risks.

1.4   These guidelines on managing risks in Outsourcing are intended to provide direction and
guidance to banks which choose to outsource financial services to adopt sound and responsive
risk management practices for effective oversight, due diligence and management of risks
arising from such outsourcing activities. The guidelines are applicable to outsourcing
arrangements entered into by a bank with a service provider located in India or elsewhere. The
service provider may either be a member of the group/conglomerate to which the bank belongs,
or an unrelated party.

1.5 The underlying principles behind these guidelines are that the regulated entity should
ensure that outsourcing arrangements neither diminish its ability to fulfil its obligations to
customers and RBI nor impede effective supervision by RBI. Banks, therefore, have to take
steps to ensure that the service provider employs the same high standard of care in performing
the services as would be employed by the banks, if the activities were conducted within the
banks and not outsourced. Accordingly banks should not engage in outsourcing that would
result in their internal control, business conduct or reputation being compromised or weakened.

1.6 (i) Banks which desire to outsource financial services would not require prior approval from
RBI whether the service provider is located in India or outside India.
(ii) In regard to outsourced services relating to credit cards, RBI's detailed instructions
contained in its circular on credit card activities vide DBOD. FSD. BC. 49/24.01.011/2005-06
dated 21st November 2005 would be applicable.


2 Activities that should not be Outsourced

Banks which choose to outsource financial services should however not outsource core
management functions including Internal Audit, Compliance function and decision-making
functions like determining compliance with KYC norms for opening deposit accounts, according
sanction for loans (including retail loans) and management of investment portfolio.

3 Material Outsourcing

During Annual Financial Inspections, RBI will review the implementation of these guidelines to
assess the quality of related risk management systems particularly in respect of material
outsourcing. Material outsourcing arrangements are those, which if disrupted, have the
potential to significantly impact the business operations, reputation or profitability. Materiality of
outsourcing would be based on :

   •   The level of importance to the bank of the activity being outsourced
   •   The potential impact of the outsourcing on the bank on various parameters             such as
       earnings, solvency, liquidity, funding capital and risk profile;
   •   The likely impact on the bank’s reputation and brand value, and ability to achieve its
       business objectives, strategy and plans, should the service provider fail to perform the
       service;
   •   The cost of the outsourcing as a proportion of total operating costs of the bank;
   •   The aggregate exposure to that particular service provider, in cases where the bank out
       sources various functions to the same service provider.

4 Bank's role and Regulatory and Supervisory requirements

4.1 The outsourcing of any activity by bank does not diminish its obligations, and those of its
Board and senior management, who have the ultimate responsibility for the outsourced activity.
Banks would therefore be responsible for the actions of their service provider including Direct
Sales Agents/ Direct Marketing Agents and recovery agents and the confidentiality of
information pertaining to the customers that is available with the service provider.           Banks
should retain ultimate control of the outsourced activity.
4.2 It is imperative for the bank, when performing its due diligence in relation to outsourcing, to
consider all relevant laws, regulations, guidelines and conditions of approval, licensing or
registration.

4.3 Outsourcing arrangements should not affect the rights of a customer against the bank,
including the ability of the customer to obtain redress as applicable under relevant laws. Since
the customers are required to deal with the service providers in the process of dealing with the
bank, banks should incorporate a clause in the product literature /brochures etc., stating that
they may use the services of agents in sales/marketing etc of the products. The role of agents
may be indicated in broad terms.

4.4 Outsourcing, whether the service provider is located in India or abroad should not impede
or interfere with the ability of the bank to effectively oversee and manage its activities nor
should it impede the Reserve Bank of India in carrying out its supervisory functions and
objectives.

4.5 Banks need to have a robust grievance redressal mechanism, which in no way should be
compromised on account of outsourcing.

4.6 The service provider if it is not a subsidiary of the bank should not be owned or controlled
by any director or officer/employee of the bank or their relatives having the same meaning as
assigned under Section 6 of the Companies Act, 1956.

5. Risk Management practices for outsourced Financial Services

5.1 Outsourcing Policy
A bank intending to outsource any of its financial activities should put in place a comprehensive
outsourcing policy, approved by its Board, which incorporates, inter alia, criteria for selection of
such activities as well as service providers, parameters for defining material outsourcing based
on the broad criteria indicated in para 3, delegation of authority depending on risks and
materiality and systems to monitor and review the operations of these activities.
5.2 Role of the Board and Senior Management

5.2.1 The Board of the bank, or a Committee of the Board to which powers have been
delegated should be responsible interalia for: -

       •   Approving a framework to evaluate the risks and materiality of all existing and
           prospective outsourcing and the policies that apply to such arrangements;
       •   Laying down appropriate approval authorities for outsourcing depending on risks and
           materiality.
       •   Undertaking regular review of outsourcing strategies and arrangements for their
           continued relevance, and safety and soundness and
       •   Deciding on business activities of a material nature to be outsourced, and approving
           such arrangements.

5.2.2 Senior Management would be responsible for :
   •   Evaluating the risks and materiality of all existing and prospective outsourcing, based on
       the framework approved by the Board;
   •   Developing and implementing sound and prudent outsourcing policies and procedures
       commensurate with the nature, scope and complexity of the outsourcing;
   •   Reviewing periodically the effectiveness of policies and     procedures;
   •   Communicating information pertaining to material outsourcing risks to the Board in a
       timely manner;
   •   Ensuring that contingency plans, based on realistic and probable disruptive scenarios,
       are in place and tested;
   •   Ensuring that there is independent review and audit for compliance with set policies.
   •   Undertaking periodic review of outsourcing arrangements to identify new material
       outsourcing risks as they arise.

5.3 Evaluation of the Risks
The key risks in outsourcing that need to be evaluated by the banks are: -

   (a) Strategic Risk – The service provider may conduct business on its own behalf, which is
       inconsistent with the overall strategic goals of the bank.
(b) Reputation Risk – Poor service from the service provider, its customer interaction not being
consistent with the overall standards of the bank.
(c) Compliance Risk – Privacy, consumer and prudential laws not adequately complied with.
(d) Operational Risk – Arising due to technology failure, fraud, error, inadequate financial
capacity to fulfil obligations and/or provide remedies.
(e) Legal Risk- includes but is not limited to exposure to fines, penalties, or punitive damages
resulting from supervisory actions, as well as private settlements due to omissions and
commissions of the service provider.
(f) Exit Strategy Risk – This could arise from over–reliance on one firm, the loss of relevant
skills in the bank itself preventing it from bringing the activity back in-house and contracts
entered into wherein speedy exits would be prohibitively expensive.
(g) Counter party Risk – Due to inappropriate underwriting or credit assessments.
(h) Country Risk – Due to the political, social or legal climate creating added risk.
(i) Contractual risk – arising from whether or not the bank has the ability to enforce the contract.
(j) Concentration and Systemic Risk – Due to lack of control of individual banks over a service
provider, more so when overall banking industry has considerable exposure to one service
provider.

5.4 Evaluating the Capability of the Service Provider
5.4.1 In considering or renewing an outsourcing arrangement, appropriate due diligence should
be performed to assess the capability of the service provider to comply with obligations in the
outsourcing agreement. Due diligence should take into consideration qualitative and
quantitative, financial, operational and reputational factors. Banks should consider whether the
service providers' systems are compatible with their own and also whether their standards of
performance including in the area of customer service are acceptable to it. Banks should also
consider, while evaluating the capability of the service provider, issues relating to undue
concentration of outsourcing arrangements with a single service provider. Where possible, the
bank should obtain independent reviews and market feedback on the service provider to
supplement its own findings.

5.4.2 Due diligence should involve an evaluation of all available information about the service
provider, including but not limited to:-
   •   Past experience and competence to implement and support the proposed activity over
       the contracted period;
   •   Financial soundness and ability to service commitments even under adverse conditions;
   •   Business reputation and culture, compliance, complaints and outstanding or potential
       litigation;
   •   Security and internal control, audit coverage, reporting and monitoring environment,
       Business continuity management;
   •   External factors like political, economic, social and legal environment of the jurisdiction in
       which the service provider operates and other events that may impact service
       performance.
   •   Ensuring due diligence by service provider of its employees.

5.5 The Outsourcing Agreement
5.5.1 The terms and conditions governing the contract between the bank and the service
provider should be carefully defined in written agreements and vetted by bank's legal counsel
on their legal effect and enforceability. Every such agreement should address the risks and risk
mitigation strategies. The agreement should be sufficiently flexible to allow the bank to retain an
appropriate level of control over the outsourcing and the right to intervene with appropriate
measures to meet legal and regulatory obligations. The agreement should also bring out the
nature of legal relationship between the parties – i.e. whether agent, principal or otherwise.
Some of the key provisions of the contract would be:
       •   The contract should clearly define what activities are going to be outsourced
           including appropriate service and performance standards.
       •   The bank must ensure it has the ability to access all books, records and information
           relevant to the outsourced activity available with the service provider.
       •   The contract should provide for continuous monitoring and assessment by the bank
           of the service provider so that any necessary corrective measure can be taken
           immediately.
       •   A termination clause and minimum periods to execute a termination provision, if
           deemed necessary, should be included.
       •   Controls to ensure customer data confidentiality and service providers' liability in
           case of breach of security and leakage of confidential customer related information.


       •   Contingency plans to ensure business continuity.
      •   The contract should provide for the prior approval/consent by the bank of the use of
          subcontractors by the service provider for all or part of an outsourced activity.
      •   Provide the bank with the right to conduct audits on the service provider whether by
          its internal or external auditors, or by agents appointed to act on its behalf and to
          obtain copies of any audit or review reports and findings made on the service
          provider in conjunction with the services performed for the bank.
      •   Outsourcing agreements should include clauses to allow the Reserve Bank of India
          or persons authorised by it to access the bank’s documents, records of transactions,
          and other necessary information given to, stored or processed by the service
          provider within a reasonable time.
      •   Outsourcing agreement should also include clause to recognise the right of the
          Reserve Bank to cause an inspection to be made of a service provider of a bank and
          its books and account by one or more of its officers or employees or other persons.
      •   In cases where the controlling/Head offices of foreign banks operating in India
          outsource the activities related to the Indian operations, the Agreement should
          include clauses to allow the RBI or persons authorized by it to access the bank's
          documents, records of transactions and other necessary information given or stored
          or processed by the service provider within a reasonable time as also clauses to
          recognise the right of RBI to cause an inspection to be made of a service provider
          and its books and accounts by one or more of its officers or employees or other
          persons.
      •   The outsourcing agreement should also provide that confidentiality of customer's
          information should be maintained even after the contract expires or gets terminated.
      •   The outsourcing agreement should provide for the preservation of documents and
          data by the service provider in accordance with the legal/regulatory obligation of the
          bank in this regard.

5.6 Confidentiality and Security
5.6.1 Public confidence and customer trust in the bank is a prerequisite for the stability and
reputation of the bank. Hence the bank should seek to ensure the preservation and protection




of the security and confidentiality of customer information in the custody or possession of the
service provider.
5.6.2 Access to customer information by staff of the service provider should be on 'need to
know' basis i.e., limited to those areas where the information is required in order to perform the
outsourced function.

5.6.3 The bank should ensure that the service provider is able to isolate and clearly identify the
bank’s customer information, documents, records and assets to protect the confidentiality of the
information. In instances, where service provider acts as an outsourcing agent for multiple
banks, care should be taken to build strong safeguards so that there is no comingling of
information/documents, records and assets.

5.6.4 The bank should review and monitor the security practices and control processes of the
service provider on a regular basis and require the service provider to disclose security
breaches.

5.6.5 The bank should immediately notify RBI in the event of any breach of security and
leakage of confidential customer related information. In these eventualities, the bank would be
liable to its customers for any damage.

5.7 Responsibilities of DSA/ DMA/ Recovery Agents

5.7.1 Code of conduct for Direct Sales Agents formulated by the Indian Banks' Association
(IBA) could be used in formulating their own codes for Direct Sales Agents / Direct Marketing
Agents/ Recovery Agents. Banks should ensure that the Direct Sales Agents / Direct Marketing
Agents/ Recovery Agents are properly trained to handle with care and senstivity, their
responsibilities particularly aspects like soliciting customers, hours of calling, privacy of
customer information and conveying the correct terms and conditions of the products on offer
etc.

5.7.2 Recovery Agents should adhere to extant instructions on Fair Practices Code for lending
(Circular DBOD. Leg. No. BC.104 /09.07.007 /2002-03 dated 5th May 2003) as also their own
code for collection of dues. If the banks do not have their own code they should, at the
minimum, adopt the Indian Banks Association's code for collection of dues and repossession of


security. It is essential that the Recovery Agents refrain from action that could damage the
integrity and reputation of the bank and that they observe strict customer confidentiality.
5.7.3 The bank and their agents should not resort to intimidation or harassment of any kind
either verbal or physical against any person in their debt collection efforts, including acts
intended to humiliate publicly or intrude the privacy of the debtors’ family members, referees
and friends, making threatening and anonymous calls or making false and misleading
representations.

5.8 Business Continuity and Management of Disaster Recovery Plan
5.8.1 A bank should require its service providers to develop and establish a robust framework
for documenting, maintaining and testing business continuity and recovery procedures. Banks
need to ensure that the service provider periodically tests the Business Continuity and
Recovery Plan and may also consider occasional joint testing and recovery exercises with its
service provider.

5.8.2 In order to mitigate the risk of unexpected termination of the outsourcing agreement or
liquidation of the service provider, banks should retain an appropriate level of control over their
outsourcing and the right to intervene with appropriate measures to continue its business
operations in such cases without incurring prohibitive expenses and without any break in the
operations of the bank and its services to the customers.

5.8.3 In establishing a viable contingency plan, banks should consider the availability of
alternative service providers or the possibility of bringing the outsourced activity back in-house
in an emergency and the costs, time and resources that would be involved.

5.8.4 Outsourcing often leads to the sharing of facilities operated by the service provider. The
bank should ensure that service providers are able to isolate the bank’s information, documents
and records, and other assets. This is to ensure that in adverse conditions, all documents,
records of transactions and information given to the service provider, and assets of the bank,
can be removed from the possession of the service provider in order to continue its business
operations, or deleted, destroyed or rendered unusable.




5.9 Monitoring and Control of Outsourced Activities
5.9.1 The bank should have in place a management structure to monitor and control its
outsourcing activities. It should ensure that outsourcing agreements with the service provider
contain provisions to address their monitoring and control of outsourced activities.
5.9.2 A central record of all material outsourcing that is readily accessible for review by the
Board and senior management of the bank should be maintained. The records should be
updated promptly and half yearly reviews should be placed before the Board.

5.9.3 Regular audits by either the internal auditors or external auditors of the bank should
assess the adequacy of the risk management practices adopted in overseeing and managing
the outsourcing arrangement, the bank’s compliance with its risk management framework and
the requirements of these guidelines.

5.9.4 Banks should at least on an annual basis, review the financial and operational condition
of the service provider to assess its ability to continue to meet its outsourcing obligations. Such
due diligence reviews, which can be based on all available information about the service
provider should highlight any deterioration or breach in performance standards, confidentiality
and security, and in business continuity preparedness.


5.9.5 In the event of termination of the agreement for any reason, this should be publicized so
as to ensure that the customers do not continue to entertain the service provider.


5.10 Redressal of Grievances related to Outsourced services
a) Banks should constitute Grievance Redressal Machinery within the bank and give wide
publicity about it through electronic and print media. The name and contact number of
designated grievance redressal officer of the bank should be made known and widely
publicised. The designated officer should ensure that genuine grievances of customers are
redressed promptly without involving delay. It should be clearly indicated that banks' Grievance
Redressal Machinery will also deal with the issue relating to services provided by the
outsourced agency.




b) Generally, a time limit of 30 days may be given to the customers for preferring their
complaints / grievances. The grievance redressal procedure of the bank and the time frame
fixed for responding to the complaints should be placed on the bank's website.
c) If a complainant does not get satisfactory response from the bank within 60 days from the
date of his lodging the complaint, he will have the option to approach the Office of the
concerned Banking Ombudsman for redressal of his grievance/s.
5.11 Reporting of transactions to FIU or other competent authorities
Banks would be responsible for making Currency Transactions Reports and Suspicious
Transactions Reports to FIU or any other competent authority in respect of the banks' customer
related activities carried out by the service providers.

6. Centralised List of Outsourced Agents
If a service providers services are terminated by a bank, IBA would have to be informed with
reasons for termination. IBA would be maintaining a caution list of such service providers for
the entire banking industry for sharing among banks.

7 Off-shore outsourcing of Financial Services

7.1 The engagement of service providers in a foreign country exposes a bank to country risk -
economic, social and political conditions and events in a foreign country that may adversely
affect the bank. Such conditions and events could prevent the service provider from carrying
out the terms of its agreement with the bank. To manage the country risk involved in such
outsourcing activities, the bank should take into account and closely monitor government
policies and political, social, economic and legal conditions in countries where the service
provider is based, during the risk assessment process and on a continuous basis, and establish
sound procedures for dealing with country risk problems. This includes having appropriate
contingency and exit strategies. In principle, arrangements should only be entered into with
parties operating in jurisdictions generally upholding confidentiality clauses and agreements.
The governing law of the arrangement should also be clearly specified.

7.2 The activities outsourced outside India should be conducted in a manner so as not to hinder
efforts to supervise or reconstruct the India activities of the bank in a timely manner.



7.3 The outsourcing related to overseas operations of Indian banks would be governed by both,
these guidelines and the host country guidelines. Where there are differences, the more
stringent of the two would prevail. However where there is any conflict, the host country
guidelines would prevail.

8. Outsourcing within a Group/ Conglomerate
The risk management practices expected to be adopted by a bank while outsourcing to a
related party (i.e party within the Group/ Conglomerate) would be identical to those specified in
Para 5 of this guidelines.

9. Self- Assessment of Existing/Proposed Outsourcing Arrangements
Banks may conduct a self-assessment of their existing outsourcing agreements within a time
bound plan and bring them in line with the above guidelines expeditiously.
